---
title: Land Management
description: including soil biodiversity in land management goals
images: ["/img/SFREC-storm.jpg"]
---

Despite their critical importance to ecosystem functions, soil communities are often left out of management goals. Recognizing the need for land management decisions to include soil biodiversity, I focus on testing how management strategies impact soil communities and their role in ecosystem functioning. Working with an interdisciplinary team of restoration ecologists, biogeochemists, and ranchers, I am testing how compost amendments affect rangeland services across precipitation extremes. Compost provides plants with nutrients and improves soil water retention, boosting above- and belowground production (Shaw et al. in prep). Compared to non-amended and inorganic fertilizer treatments, the positive effects of compost on soil moisture, soil C storage, and forage production are most evident under drought and on land that was previously overgrazed (Shaw et al. in prep). Sharing results at workshops with ranchers and landowners, I learned about their goals and modified data collection to include forage quality. These results also have some unexplained effects. I found that adding inorganic fertilizer and water to mimic effects of compost do not yield the same plant biomass responses as compost amendments, suggesting that mechanisms besides these resources are at play. Organic material not present in inorganic fertilizer can have positive effects on soil biodiversity and abundance, possibly explaining the discrepancy. To address this gap, I was awarded a USDA NIFA Postdoctoral Fellowship to link above- and belowground responses to rangeland compost amendments. My early results show that compost addition supports belowground predator invertebrates and their top-down control of plant parasites, helping protect root production and bolstering soil C accrual. 

