---
title: Antarctic Soil Ecosystems
description: soil communities of the McMurdo Dry Valleys
images: ["/img/taylorvalley.png"]
---

Antarctic ecosystems are an incredible model system for studying soil communities. In the absence of plants and other interacting factors, the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica (MDV) provide a unique opportunity to study complete soil communities where all invertebrate taxa can be identified. These systems have extremely low soil organic C and for decades a two-level food web (microbes and their grazers) was accepted. Using a stable isotope approach to distinguish trophic levels, my research shows that despite extremely low C availability, the MDV soils support at least three trophic levels, including an omnivore-predator (Shaw et al. 2018). 

The MDV soil trophic structures shift under environmental change, where increased soil salinity (such as what occurs when permafrost melt relocates solutes) releases bacteria from top-down pressure as bacteria grazing nematodes decline (Shaw and Wall 2019). By tracking C sources in the soil food web, I found that these changes have landscape-level implications for community and ecosystem responses to global change. Glacier and permafrost melt cause soil invertebrates to shift from very old legacy C to new C sources that become available as cyanobacteria, algae, and mosses grow in newly wet habitat. This new C promotes spread of taxa that were previously limited lake and stream margins, increasing diversity and changing communities of previously dry soils (Shaw et al. in prep). 


##Soil ecosystem services  
Soil ecosystem services (i.e., benefits that humans get from ecosystems) such as soil C storage and food production are directly related to specific soil ecosystem functions (i.e., processes that control the fluxes of material through the environment) such as decomposition and nutrient cycling. These ecosystem functions are shifting under rising CO2, warming, and N deposition and are linked to soil community responses. This link is key to understanding and predicting soil ecosystem functions, and respective services. Yet, soil invertebrates and many other taxa are highly understudied and often left out of global change and ecosystem function experiments. I am bridging this gap by testing how ecosystem functions shift with soil community trajectories under global change scenarios. My work in subalpine forests (Rocky Mountain National Park, CO) showed a shift to ephemeral, fast-growing plant parasitic and bacterivore nematode groups under long-term N addition and highlighted that increased root and microbial turnover by soil invertebrates was key to unexplained long-term forest C loss (Shaw et al. 2019). 

##Land Management  
Despite their critical importance to ecosystem functions, soil communities are often left out of management goals. Recognizing the need for land management decisions to include soil biodiversity, I focus on testing how management strategies impact soil communities and their role in ecosystem functioning. Working with an interdisciplinary team of restoration ecologists, biogeochemists, and ranchers, I am testing how compost amendments affect rangeland services across precipitation extremes. Compost provides plants with nutrients and improves soil water retention, boosting above- and belowground production (Shaw et al. in prep). Compared to non-amended and inorganic fertilizer treatments, the positive effects of compost on soil moisture, soil C storage, and forage production are most evident under drought and on land that was previously overgrazed (Shaw et al. in prep). Sharing results at workshops with ranchers and landowners, I learned about their goals and modified data collection to include forage quality. These results also have some unexplained effects. I found that adding inorganic fertilizer and water to mimic effects of compost do not yield the same plant biomass responses as compost amendments, suggesting that mechanisms besides these resources are at play. Organic material not present in inorganic fertilizer can have positive effects on soil biodiversity and abundance, possibly explaining the discrepancy. To address this gap, I was awarded a USDA NIFA Postdoctoral Fellowship to link above- and belowground responses to rangeland compost amendments. My early results show that compost addition supports belowground predator invertebrates and their top-down control of plant parasites, helping protect root production and bolstering soil C accrual. 




